---
title: Studying at the University of Jyv채skyl채
slug: studying-at-jyu
publishdate: 2015-09-23
---

A new batch of students started their IT studies at the
[University of Jyv채skyl채](https://www.jyu.fi/en) this month. I graduated from the very
same university just recently, so why not share a few thoughts on the
experiences I had. This post is a mixture of facts about what the
university studies are like, and how I personally perceived them.

<!--more-->

Degrees and study lines
-----------------------

I completed both the bachelor degree and masters degree in IT
([Mathematical Information Technology](https://www.jyu.fi/it/en)), which is a
standard combo for all new IT students. New students apply to study both
degrees automatically, and generally cannot choose to apply for just the
bachelor degree. However, students that have completed studies
equivalent of the bachelor degree can apply for just the masters degree.
It takes about three years to complete the bachelor degree, and two
years to complete the masters degree.

Both degrees are split into study lines that student can choose to
specialise in. The study lines change over the years, but usually there
are at least three options to choose from: computational science,
educational technology, and software and telecommunications technology.
Computational science study line teaches the principles for solving
scientific problems using mathematical simulation models. Educational
technology study line focuses on the research of technology as an
educational tool.

I chose to specialise in software and telecommunications technology. It
is the pretty much the most standard study line available in IT. It
provides both the theoretical and practical background for developing
software and researching software practices. Most of the early studies
focus on the theoretical side with courses on algorithms, automatons and
formal languages. The later studies focus on practices used in
real-world software development such as software architectures,
requirements engineering, and testing and quality assurance.

The choice to specialise in software and telecommunications technology
was OK at the time. There's a large variety of courses available every
year, and generally many of the courses from other study lines fit into
it as well. However, as I'm beginning to get more and more interested
in data sciences and machine learning, I feel like getting a more
in-depth background computational sciences or a related study line would
have been more useful.

Math and other minor studies
----------------------------

In addition to the study lines, the students are expected to complete
minor studies. Students have to complete either basic studies in two
different subjects or both basic and intermediate studies in one
subject.

Students are pretty much free to choose which ever minors they like, but
they are generally recommended to take some studies in mathematics.
Mathematics used to be a mandatory minor for all students, but these
days it is mandatory to only specific study lines such as the
computational sciences.

There are two ways to complete minor studies in mathematics. Either
follow the same path as the math majors (choice A) or follow a path
designed for those who study math as a minor (choice B). The choice B
involves mostly calculus based math, while choice A goes directly into
mathematical analysis. The choice A studies feel like they require a lot
of devotion in order to pass them, while the choice B studies can be
completed quite nicely on the side of all of the IT studies.

Most students also choose B over A, and even less choose to study math
at all as more alternatives have become available. I suspect that the
trend wont change either since the IT and math studies are not
integrated well to begin with. I started math studies in the choice A,
but I later switched to choice B. I switched mostly because I felt the
math courses were too intensive to study at the same time with IT
courses, and because I lacked the devotion necessary to study "real"
math.

Flexibility
-----------

Common studies in all study lines are academic communication and writing
courses, the mandatory English and Swedish courses, the theses, the
theses related seminars, and some of the core IT studies such as
Programming 101. The rest of the studies described in the curriculum
work as a baseline to build your degrees on: students are expected to
follow the curriculum, but in many cases courses can be replaced with
alternative courses.

The freedom of choosing your courses leaves a lot of room for
customisation, but it also makes each student responsible for planning
their own studies. In fact, every student has to keep track of their own
personal study plan. The faculty student advisors assist students at
building their study plans.

The downside of customisability is that it makes it impossible for the
faculty to plan the curriculum for the academic year without causing
some conflicts in students' study plans. The freshman year for students
is usually pretty straightforward, but usually there is at least a few
courses that have overlapping schedules in the following years. With a
unified plan, the faculty could easily streamline the courses and offer
much more advanced lectures. With the flexible study plans, students
themselves are responsible for choosing which course events to go to.

Fortunately, it's not mandatory to attend to most of the IT course
lectures, and a lot of the course material in the IT courses is
available in the web. Most of the lectures are recorded, reading and
exercise material are made available in HTML/PDF formats, and the
lecturer, teacher's assistants, and other students can be reached via
course mailing lists. With the help of the course material, students can
easily keep track of courses they cannot always participate in
physically. In some courses, I relied on the course material alone while
I was working at a job simultaneously.

The customisability of courses also mean that the progress of studies is
mostly measured in courses passed instead of years studied. There is not
really a way to "repeat a year" because of failed studies. Instead,
you simply repeat the courses that you were not able to finish.

Theory vs practice
------------------

There's a tension between teaching theory and practice in the
university. Academic nature of the university pulls towards theoretical
studies, while there is a growing interest in introducing courses that
teach the practical side of things.

Most courses focus on either theory or practice. For example, automatons
and formal languages course focuses entirely on teaching the theory, and
introduction to computer graphics only slightly touches existing
graphics APIs such as OpenGL during the last week. On the other hand,
courses such as GUI programming teach you how to work with a GUI
programming library/framework such as WinForms and WPF. Occasionally,
private companies offer their own courses through the university to
promote their own platforms. Examples of these courses are Microsoft's
Windows phone programming courses and Digia's Qt/QML programming
courses.

While I agree that there is a need for providing practical courses, I
preferred almost all of the theoretical courses over the practical ones.
I feel like most of the things I learned during the practical courses I
could have learned during a job when necessary, while the theoretical
background could provide me a more abstract set of tools that are harder
to pick up later on.

Summary
-------

I wish the studies were more well structured than they were, but I guess
the university was just there to provide the tools that I could use to
learn. One way to keep myself on track was to constantly keep my study
plan up to date. I kept reordering and optimizing my course schedule
according to what was being taught during the year, and I threw out the
old plans I no longer was interested in following.

Getting a job made it awfully difficult to study. Like most IT students,
I got a bit greedy and continued working as a full-time employee after
my practical training. I couldn't really attend most of the lectures,
and ultimately I couldn't focus on the more advanced classes I kind of
wish I had studied.

In any case, I'm quite satisfied with the knowledge and experience I
got from the university. I got a pretty solid base to start developing
my craft on, and I made great friends and contacts during the years.
